---
created: 2023-10-27T13:11
updated: 2023-12-20T14:44
publisher: Jeu Lausanne Blog
bibliography: " /Users/dna4/Repositories/phd.thgie.ch/assets/minarett_attack.bib"
---
# Minarett Attack - A video game as rhetoric device in the political communication of the extreme right

*Did Minarett Attack work as a rhetorical device during the referendum of 29 Nov. 2009 "Gegen den Bau von Minaretten"? How did it influence the political landscape of the time?*

Adrian Demleitner, [adrian.demleitner@students.unibe.ch](mailto:adrian.demleitner@students.unibe.ch)

This blog post looks at the use of a video game in a political campaign from 2009 by a party on the extreme right. I'm looking at the game in question as a rhetoric device. Since the game can't be played any more, I'll analyse what the internet was able to preserve – press coverage as well as various media artefacts. This enables me to analyse the application of visual design rhetoric within the game, as well as the game's reception in the press. Intention and effect are two important aspects for a rhetoric analysis [@fernandez-varaIntroductionGameAnalysis2019; @scheuermannRhetorischeDesignanalyseUnd2017].

The Islamophobic Minarett Attack wasn't my first choice. It certainly is not a video game I'm enjoying. But, after an initial analysis, I knew that contextualising and discussing the game was relevant. For my course project, I decided to start with a question: What are early examples of Swiss games that make or work as political statements. These days, in 2023 and especially in the indie game-scene, it is common to have games that interact with socio-political contexts [@westecottIndependentGameDevelopment2013]. These games then work as lenses of local and global politics, indicating social processes and struggles. I intended to search for similar, but a bit farther back in time. I hoped to find video games that come from a leftist-activist corner, but, instead ended up with a game that was outspoken provoking through the depiction of racism.

For my research, I targeted some of the larger video game specific databases, such as MobyGames or the UVL. I also tried some of the general knowledge platforms, such as Wikipedia and Google. My search inquiries were built through different combinations of the relevant keywords such as activism, politics, Switzerland, and others. Especially the relation to Switzerland was difficult and I didn't find anything suitable. Either such games generally don't exist, are not on record, or my research inquiry was too tight. Failing with querying databases, I resorted to manually go through the Swiss Games Garden database in search for fitting games, where I finally stumbled across Minarett Attack.

Although it was not the kind of game I hoped for, it fitted my research question perfectly. Minarett Attack was launched in 2009 by Goal AG during a political campaign of the SVP. The game was produced and published with the clear intention of making or working as a political statement and influence the political landscape.

## Description and context
The game was developed[^1] by Alexander Segert at Goal AG in 2009. The marketing and communication agency has existed since at least 1979 and had always had ties to the political scene on the right. So did Segert[^2] [^3], who had taken over the agency long before the development of Minarett Attack. The game was developed to be part of a larger political project, the Swiss minaret referendum[^4], which wanted to forbid the building of new minarets in Switzerland. Another component of the campaign was a poster, also widely discussed in the press and the political landscape of Switzerland for its inherent depiction of racism.

[Image of poster]

Produced in Flash and published under its own domain minarett-attack.ch, the game fitted right into the emerging area of casual and shareable online games. For example, the famous and widely popular FarmVille was released the same year. An indication is a call-to-action button at the game's end, inviting to share the game with "friends", a term that Facebook popularised for social media. Adobe Flash was a tool for the creation of animations that could be shared online through the application of a browser plugin. It introduced the simple scripting language ActionScript later and enabled the creation of interactive media. Casual games became easy and affordable to realise. Although it is difficult to acquire social media content from 2009, there are still traces of Minarett Attack in the blogosphere of that time, indicating the circulation of references to the game.

[Screenshot of empty screen]

Starting the game, the player is welcomed by a simplified but idyllic depiction of Switzerland. We have a handful of Swiss monuments, the famous Swiss Alps as background and, above all, the sun. Little by little, minarets start to emerge. The player controls a little circle, with which he must aim at the towers. A mouse click "stops" the appearance. A low dong sound is hearable, and the circle transforms into a stop-sign. If one is too slow to stop the emergence of a tower, it rests in place and can't be removed any more. Instead, muezzin appear, chanting their prayers. The player can now aim and "stop" them instead, gaining points in the process. Minarett Attack references established game mechanics, known since Duck Hunt or the in the German-speaking countries widely popular Mohrhuhn[^5]. 

[Screenshot of filled screen]

Being part of a larger political project in parallel with an equally provocative billboard campaign, the game generated a lot of press coverage. The FPÖ, an extreme right political party of Austria and another client of Goal AG, deemed the application of Minarett Attack successful. In the following year, they republished a customised version of the game during their election campaign. The game was rebranded as Moschee Baba and featured Austrian monuments instead of Swiss ones. Although beyond the scope of this text, I deem it important to state that Moschee Baba triggered much more serious discussion in Austria about the racism in the game and actually led to legal actions and political consequences[^6].

I hope by now it should be clear, why I'm using the predicate Islamophobic to describe Minarett Attack.

## Analysis and findings
As mentioned earlier, the game can't be played any more. The problem is of a technical nature. Adobe Flash output consists of a SWF file which can be embedded in a website, analogue to a video, for example. It was customary to keep the initial file small to ensure quick loading times. After a splash screen, the application would often load additional assets while displaying a loading bar to keep the visitor informed about the ongoing process. Minarett Attack was built this way, and while the Wayback Machine was able to capture the original site and initial SWF file, it did not preserve the additional assets that had to be loaded to play the game. I was capable of simulating some of the files in a mocked up environment, such as an additional file with text strings. But, I couldn't reproduce another SWF, which probably held graphic assets and other important game files.

In the following, I worked with media files I found dispersed over the internet. Especially screenshots were abundant, and I was able to locate two screen-recordings of the game, when extending my search with the follow-up game Moschee Baba. Since the game is rather simple and short, that provided more than enough material for the analysis of the visual aspects following a design rhetoric approach [@schnellerPerfektUnperfektElaboration2021]. Being generally interested in how the game was applied in a communication strategy, it made sense to also analyse its reception. Regarding the possible workload such an analysis can bring with, I concentrated on creating context as well as how the game was perceived and described through the reading of a small selection of press articles from the German-speaking countries.

A formal analysis of the game's visuals must mention the apparent simplicity of the graphics. Adobe Flash used a vectored based graphics format, that is smaller in file size and can be optimised for quicker loading times. Flash games often had full-surface graphics, heavy leaning on gradients for colouring. A maybe unintentional by-product of this production technology is the emergence of a graphic style suitable for children's books. Focusing on the different levels of details as well as the perspectives in the used graphics, I can assume that some of them were vector graphics assets gathered from elsewhere and some of them were produced for the game by the developer within Flash. Especially the difference between the minarets and the Swiss monuments are apparent.

The symbolic meaning of the graphical elements in play are quickly assessed, but deserve a brief explanation. The Swiss flag, the alps, the Swiss monuments, and the sun create a nationalistic framing and an atmosphere of all is right. Other Swiss stereotypical icons, such as cows, cheese and pastures, were left out, indicating that the game targets an urban population. During gameplay, minarets start to appear, rocket-like, numerous and larger than the alps in the background. Meanwhile, the prayer of the muezzin overplays the idyllic music that was to be heard before. Clearly, an invasion is going on! One that takes over Switzerland's pristine landscape and urban area. This depiction is an audiovisual representation of the Great Replacement conspiracy theory[^7], that existed in various forms since the 19th century, but was newly popularised in 2011. It can be assumed, that this depiction in Minarett Attack, points towards an ongoing discourse on the subject on the political right.

Finally, I would like to mention, that with the specific depiction of the muezzin, the game inscribes itself into a long tradition of stereotypical racist illustrations of Islam and Muslims. This point alone is deserving of its own article, but is left out for now.

The game itself is relatively devoid of direct messages. The game's ending produces the following text:

> Die Schweiz ist voller Minarette. Damit das nicht passiert: Am 29. November «JA zur Minarettverbots-Initiative»

The same screen for Moschee Baba reads:

> Die Steiermark ist voller Minarette und Moscheen! Damit das nicht geschieht: Am 26. September Dr. Gerhard Kurzmann und die FPÖ wählen!

Minarett Attack does not contain information about who is behind the campaign, whereas Moschee Baba links directly to the FPÖ. Both call for political action, framing the gameplay beforehand in a very specific manner. The intentions are clear, visually implemented, semantically contextualised. The game is entangled within a political framing, and for once, the connection between play and politics is not only not found problematic, but specifically requested [@pfisterPolitischeMythosAls2018].

The discussion about the Anti-Minarett campaign's inherent racism led many press outlets to mention them. The general focus was on the supposed scandal of such a campaign, without delving much on the details, mentioning poster and game. The discourse in the press intensified, when Moschee Baba ran into legal problems in Austria, concentrating on the implications for the involved people, such as Segert. Whereas the Swiss press simply covered the Anti-Minarett campaign, German left-leaning press, such as TAZ and the Süddeutsche, produced two longer articles that contextualise and cover the game in greater detail. Still, both articles reduce the game to a visual description and briefly mention the game mechanics.

> “Im Vordergrund sah man darin Schweizer Häuser, Brücken und Kirchtürme. Dahinter das Matterhorn, auf seinem Gipfel wehte eine Schweizer Fahne. Sobald man das Spiel startete, wuchsen überall Minarette aus dem Boden. Auf den Balkonen der Häuser standen plötzlich Muezzine. Die Aufgabe für den Spieler: So viele Muezzine wie möglich in kurzer Zeit zu erschießen. Das Spiel war nicht zu gewinnen. Stattdessen erschien am Ende: Game Over. "Die Schweiz ist voller Minarette. Damit das nicht passiert: Am 29. November ja zur Minarettsverbotsinitiative."” [@stawskiSchweizerKrawallmacherDeutscher2010]

> “An Niveaulosigkeit übertrifft es die Plakate bei Weitem. Im Vordergrund sieht man Schweizer Häuser, Brücken, Kirchtürme, dahinter erhebt sich das Matterhorn, auf seinem Gipfel weht eine Schweizer Fahne. Startet man das Spiel, wachsen überall Minarette aus dem Boden. Auf den Balkonen erscheinen Muezzine und rufen laut. Als Spieler soll man nun so viele Muezzine wie möglich so schnell wie möglich abschießen. Gewinnen kann man das Spiel nicht. Stattdessen erscheint ein Fenster: Game Over. "Die Schweiz ist voller Minarette. Damit das nicht passiert: Am 29. November ja zur Minarettsverbotsinitiative."” [@scheidtSchweizerWerbenGegen2009]

Focusing on the visuals equals reading the game akin to the posters, indicating a limited capacity of treating the game as its own media type. The posters were positioned in public space, passively consumed. The game was distributed and experienced in an entirely different manner, shared through informal and established social media online. I'm not a proponent of the idea that games incite violence. Still, the act of shooting minarets and Muslim brings with a different reception than the passive consumption of a poster. The game clearly plays with the Overton window[^8], a political theory that defines what one is allowed to say in political discourse. The game not only displays a radical right conspiracy theory, it also allows to active participation in the violent ridicule of a world religion and its believers.

## Discussion
Unfortunately, Minarett Attack was a "success". The Anti-Minarett initiative was voted into the constitution by the Swiss people by 57.5%. How much the game itself helped in winning that vote is difficult to capture. Understand how right-wing rhetoric works helps in this assessment. A major strategy of the right is gathering attention to be able to repeat their political statements over and over again [@schutzbachRhetorikRechtenRechtspopulistische2018]. This ensures that the rights political agenda is imposed on the public and political discourse, forcing other political actors to react. This strategy can blow up issues of minor relevance and give them an undeserved priority or direction. That video games haven't been taken serious further led to an inability to deal adequately with Minarett Attack and understand how a web-based game can sidetrack the public discourse.

My research uncovered an internal document by the FPÖ Steiermark, anonymously authored on the 30th August 2010. The three-page document is mainly a FAQ on how to react to press inquiries about the game Moschee Baba. Justifications for the game link directly to the party's political program about the supposed invasion of Islam. Questions about the violence against Islam in the game should be answered with the right to freedom of speech. I found nothing of this sort for Minarett Attack, but I can assume that the initiative committee and Goal AG prepared that campaign equally professional. The game enabled the political right in Switzerland and Austria to massively gain media attention, press coverage and discourse space in the public. The continued development and adaption of the game, in official versions as well as copies, clearly points towards the games' effectivity for identification to the extreme right as well as a political tool that serves extreme right rhetoric and communication.

I want to end on a more personal side. In my opinion, Minarett Attack is not only a commissioned work, done by a professional communication agency for a political party. Through contextualizing the game, I learned about the background of the developer, Alexander Segert. He was since early on part of the extreme right, warning in Islamophobic magazines about "the creeping infiltration of the Christian West by Islam". This makes the creation of Minarett Attack a personal affair as well, a personally authored game [@siegelJeuAuteursBeginner2018]. Minarett Attack then becomes the amalgamation of an opportunity, the Anti-Minarett campaign, and personal convictions and the desire to express these. It is an ugly realisation, that a single person can have that much political influence through the development of a racist and Islamophobic game with graphics suitable for children's books.

I close with the question of how to deal with Minarett Attack's legacy. Although it posited some difficulties, I'm happy that the game can't be played any more. At the same time, I deem it important that the knowledge about this game's existence and effects on the political landscape of Switzerland is preserved. But how does one preserve such a game, and its context, and not just reducing it to metadata? I can't decide myself how we handle our past and ongoing racism. This needs to be a public discourse. Opening up the video games studies perspective on this specific game might be a first step.

## Bibliography

[^1]: Although being head of Goal AG, Segert was repeatedly mentioned as the developer of the game, not just project or campaign manager.
[^2]: “Segert ist schon lange aktiv in der rechten Szene in der Schweiz. In den 90er-Jahren war er Mitglied der rechten Psychosekte VPM, später hat er für mehrere rechte Publikationen geschrieben, vor allem für die erzkonservative Zeitung Schweizerzeit. Sein Chef dort war Ulrich Schlüer, der jetzt die Anti-Minarett-Initiative mitgegründet hat.” (Scheidt, 2009, p. 3)
[^3]: “Früher schrieb er in der islamfeindlichen Zeitschrift Bürger und Christ, in der er vor "der schleichenden Infiltration des christlichen Abendlandes durch den Islam" warnte, wie ihn der Zürcher Tages-Anzeiger zitiert.” (Stawski, 2010, p. 1)
[^4]: Read more about this political project on Wikipedia: [2009 Swiss minaret referendum - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2009_Swiss_minaret_referendum)
[^5]: Crazy Chicken, the original title for Mohrhuhn, was also a marketing campaign game. See Wikipedia for more information: [Crazy Chicken - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crazy_Chicken)
[^6]: Read more about the scandals around Moschee Baba on the Wikipedia entry on the game: [Moschee baba – Wikipedia](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moschee_baba)
[^7]: Read more about the Great Replacement on Wikiepdia: [Great Replacement - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Replacement)
[^8]: Read more about the Overton window on Wikipedia: [Overton window - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window)