---
updated: 2023-08-08T11:27
---
# Exposé
## Where is Switzerland? Interdisciplinary perspectives on en/decoding nationality in the visuality of early digital games from Switzerland
*Work in progress.*

- [1. Introduction and problem statement](#1.%20Introduction%20and%20problem%20statement)
- [2. Current state of research](#2.%20Current%20state%20of%20research)
- [3. Theoretical framework](#3.%20Theoretical%20framework)
- [4. Objectives and research questions](#4.%20Objectives%20and%20research%20questions)
- [5. Research design and methodology](#5.%20Research%20design%20and%20methodology)
- [6. Zeit- und Arbeitsplan](#6.%20Zeit-%20und%20Arbeitsplan)
- [7. Bibliographie](#7.%20Bibliographie)

## 1. Introduction and problem statement
- See [abstract](notes/Abstract.md) for now.

### 1.1 Visuality
- what is meant by visuality #todo

### 1.2 Visuality in digital games
- on the specifics of the visible image in video games, see Stefan Möring's Conditional Cyberimage. #todo

## 2. Current state of research
### 2.1 Literature
- outline literature so far #todo 

### 2.2 Research gap
- also see [4. Objectives and research questions](#4.%20Objectives%20and%20research%20questions)

#### 2.2.1 The image in local video game histories #todo

#### 2.2.2 The image in digital games and its materiality
Based on my assumptions, it is my hypothesis that there is an unacknowledged interplay between the techno-historic limits of video game development and the reception of the image, respectfully, the generation of meaning for the player. Working on this research question demands an interdisciplinary approach that can handle both domains, technology and visuality, halves of a proposed whole.

Coding for visuality involves multimodal design. The code written and the output generated by that code does not correlate aesthetically. The brief moment of translation, from one system of signifiers into another happens already in the coders mind (or knowledge) before the computational act itself. There is a double rhetoric at play, one for the code, one for the visuality.

I am essentially interested in the transformation or translation of meaning from one system of signifiers into another. The materiality of visuality in video games is only on the surface comparable to paint in the painting. It is much closer to artworks where the artist wrote instructions. The basis of the image in video games is of textual nature, and as such opens it self to being analysed like a literal text.

### 2.3 Own research #todo
#### 2.3.1 Corpora
- see [Image Corpus](notes/Image%20Corpus.md) and [OpenRefine and Wikidata](notes/OpenRefine%20and%20Wikidata.md)

#### 2.3.2 Discourse Analysis
- Case Study [Ball Raider](games/Ball%20Raider.md)
- Masculinity mit Aurelia Brandenburg

#### 2.3.3 Critical Code Analysis
- Case Study [VICE](notes/VICE.md)

## 3. Theoretical frameworks
- Semiotics and discourse analysis
- Design rhetorics
- Cybertext- and image

## 4. Objectives and research questions

### 4.1 Objectives
This dissertation has the following interlocking research objectives.

#### 4.1.1 Historical design analysis of Swiss video games
This objective connects the dissertation with the research project Confederatio Ludens and its research goal of analysing the history of Swiss video game design and development. The focus is laid on the discourse analysis of the image material. The goal is to identify flows and novelties, popcultural references and visual discourse regarding the visuality and how those relate to the concept of Switzerland as a historic unity.

Part of this research objective is the creation of two corpora. The first consists of the digital games that are researched in the Confoederatio Ludens project. The project will maintain it's own dataset, hosted on the Swiss Games Garden platform, which consists of a Drupal installation and a custom frontend. In order to uphold FAIR/CARE principles, I will maintain a duplicate dataset on Wikidata. Being linked-data and graph-based, Wikidata will enable some machine-assisted research approaches, such as visualising networks of actors.

The second corpus consists of visual material regarding the digital games from the games list. The images will mainly be taken directly from the games according to a strategy laid out later. Since the focus of the dissertation is on the interplay of code and image, paratextual material such as box arts or advertisement will only be collected for case studies. The collection strategy includes formal elements, game content and is further build on the Game FAVR (Arsenault et al., 2015).

#### 4.1.2 Bridging the analysis of visuality and technology in video games
Stepping fully into my own dissertation I want to bridge the analysis of two different domains. Code and visuality are interrelated and part of the feedback loop of gaming machine and player. This objective is distinguished by being research on a methodological approach, the goal being testing and examining the possibilities of a joined analysis of the two halves of this proposed whole.

#### 4.1.3 Discourse on multimodality of coding for visuality
The third objective wants to research the consequences, impact and effects of momentum of transformation from code to visuality. If code and image are interrelated in terms of meaning and discourse, video game developers working on technical aspects have to be inquired in terms of their power to shape the image discourse. Think of how pixels and glitches entered our aesthetic vocabulary. This object is gearing towards a media-theoretical approach that expands Vilém Flussers concept of the *technical image* towards video games.

It is hardly possible to see beyond the horizon of transformation from code to image. Looking at the visuality one can only make assumption about the code and vice versa. This has a profound impact on designing visuality through code.

### 4.2 Research questions
- Main Question(s) #todo
- To what extend was nationality approached through the visuality of digital games made in Switzerland in 20th century?
- How does the visuality of digital games work with the concept of nationality?

#### Related Questions
To what extend are the technological foundations of video games and their visuality entangled? Can they be treated as separate domains, or do they have to be read as paratexts to each other? Are they on a semiological continuum, or is there a shift of expression at the moment of transformation from code to image? Can a games code be read meaningful towards the image that it emanates?

## 5.  Research design and methodology
### 5.1 Research data
The research base material is built by two corpora – the digital games list and it's metadata, and visual material regarding those games. Whereas I am actively working collaboratively with the research team on the former, I am solely responsible for the latter. From this base material I will choose a reasonable number of exemplary games, which could be around 20 starting from experiences in similar projects. Exemplary means that some of the games stand in for popular genres of the time, while some others can't be put in such a schema. Further information on the corpora is outline in 5.2.2.

### 5.2 Methodology
The following points will outline the methods I will apply during my dissertation project.

#### 5.2.1 Literature Review
Worked on literature has been covered in point 2.1. The literature review was key to identify the research gap outlined in point 2.3. Further literature review will be conducted towards visuality in video games from a media theoretical perspective as well as the notion of text regarding program code.

#### 5.2.2 Corpora building and analysis
In this dissertation project, I will help building and maintaining three different corpora.

1. A comprehensive list of Swiss digital games until the year 2000 and their accompanying metadata, such as factual information, computing systems, genre, and actors involved in the development and distribution
2. A catalog of images containing visual material for the games in the first corpus
3. An archive of source code from the games in the first corpus

I reported on the current state of the first corpus in 2.3.1. This is partially a collaborative endeavour.  In contrast, the image corpus is my sole responsibility. It is built following a strategy to include as much material as is necessary to fully represent a games' aesthetics and content. Next to formal elements, a list of the visual content of a game the Game FAVR (see 2.1) model of categorisation of the visuality of a digital game can help to obtain the right material.

- Formal Elements: Color schemes, typography, compositions
- Content: Levels, sprites and characters
- FAVR: Visual modes, ocularizations, framing mechanisms, construction of tangible space
- Relevant paratexts: Box art, manuals, advertisement, etc.

As my dissertation is relying on the critical reading of source code I will have to acquire this specific research material into it's own archive. If such an acquisition is possible is unsure at the time of writing this exposé. Being able to research the interplay of technology and visuality in our Swiss digital games corpus would be the best possible outcome. Further thoughts on this problematic can be found in 5.3.1. 

All three corpora are built and maintained with FAIR/CARE principles in mind. The metadata in the corpus on Swiss digital games will be regularly published as linked open data on Wikidata. The catalog of images will be worked on in Tropy and disseminated in an Omeka archive. The archive of source code has no clear long-term path yet, but efforts are being made to create sustainable digital games archives in Switzerland. Cooperation with these archives is desirable.

#### 5.2.3 Horror Game Politics Method
The HGP method is a historical, source-critical approach to studying video games, which focuses on analysing production, product, and reception. Developed by Eugen Pfister and Arno Görgen, this method aids in reconstructing the original context through production- and reception analysis.

Since I will study the visuality as well as the source code of digital games mainly from the 1980ies and 1990ies it is important to situate the analysis properly in its historical context. The HGP method is building on Roland Barthes approach to myth-making, and was applied to reading into the political myth of horror games. This aspect of the HGP method will help me in the discourse analysis of case studies, outlined in 5.2.7.

#### 5.2.4 Oral History
An important aspect of the Confoederatio Ludens project is filling in the archival gap on the development of digital games in Switzerland. Researching the intentions of the developers, coders and graphic artists is linked to this dissertation's methods design rhetoric as well as critical code analysis, outlined in 5.2.5 and 5.2.6. I will approach oral history from an anthropological perspective, attempting to research the cultural context from the perspectives of the people entangled within those contexts. A goal of this method is to find and identify the migration, translation and transformation of visual signifiers that are visible in the games as well as understanding where the knowledge and skills regarding programming are coming from.

#### 5.2.5 Design rhetoric #todo
- I feel that design rhetorics is a key methods in bringing technology and visuality together. There is a beautiful tension between the intentions of the developers and graphic artists, that are deposited into the source code, and the affects created in the image on screen.

#### 5.2.6 Critical code analysis
Critical code analysis describes source code for software not only as functional instructions for machines, but also as cultural artefacts written by humans for humans, akin literature. This means, that source code could potentially be read in order to acquire knowledge about socio-cultural and historical contexts. To what extend source code can be treated as a literary text, or leaning more on the Foucauldian notion of text, has been tested and described in 2.4.3. First preliminary results indicate that source code is rich in knowledge, but difficult to access through digital humanities distant readings approaches.

#### 5.2.7 Discourse Analysis; Case studies #todo

### 5.3 Possible problems
In the following I will reflect on possible weaknesses in outlined research design as well as how to mitigate the risks.

#### 5.3.1 Critical code analysis
Although researching context is key to this methodology, it's main focus is source code. In the case of old digital games, such source code can be hard to obtain. Problems can arise for example if the original developers can't be contacted, don't want to share their code base or don't have it anymore. It is certain that some source code can be found, although maybe not of the originally targeted games. As a fallback, games from beyond the scope of the corpus could be enlarged to find material for this approach.

It is one of this dissertations appeals to open data: In order to study digital games, we need not only their compiled version, but also their raw source material, their game code.

#### 5.3.2 Image reception
As a historical analysis, research into the reception of the image, an important aspect of design rhetoric, is limited. This shortcoming can be balanced by the Horror-Game-Politics method, which is a source-critical approach that builds on research into the  context. 

## 6.  Zeit- und Arbeitsplan
- 4 Jahre, 2023 - 2027

- Analyse darf auch konservativ angedacht werden; darf auch mal methodisch konservativer angegangen werden; einfach mal design rethoric durchrattern
- Was wäre eine Idee für eine praktische Arbeit welche reviewed werden könnte (zB katharinas mapping) > Journey for Digital History; Review kann auch organisiert werden; trotzdem vier Aufsätze planen

1. Jahr: Literatur Recherche, Methodenfindung und Testing, Inhaltliche Auseinandersetzung durch Arbeit am Korpus und Prepapers; Expose
2. Jahr: Arbeit, Forschung und Schreiben an zwei Artikeln
	- 1ste Hälfte 2024 Particuliarities of visuality in video games, Close Reading Images (Diskurs Analyse, Design Rhetoric)
	- 2te Hälfte 2024 Particuliarities of Researching (visuality in) old Video Games from a practical aspects (necessity of play in researching video games, emulators, preservation) -> [Themenhefte Zeithistorische Forschungen Themenheft: Digital-born ](https://zzf-potsdam.de/de/news/cfp-neue-themenhefte-zeithistorische-forschungenstudies-contemporary-history-22-2025)
3. Jahr: Arbeit, Forschung und Schreiben an zwei Artikeln
	- 1ste Hälfte 2025 Close Reading Technological Foundation (Critical Code analysis, Design Rhetoric, Korpus Analyse?)
	- 2te Hälfte 2025 Ausarbeitung 
4. Jahr: Arbeit an der Dissertation, Artikel zusammenbringen 

## 7.  Bibliographie