---
doc_type: hypothesis-highlights
url: 'https://gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney'
---

# Game Studies - A Pedestal, A Table, A Love Letter: Archaeologies of Gender in Videogame History

## Metadata
- Author: [gamestudies.org]()
- Title: Game Studies - A Pedestal, A Table, A Love Letter: Archaeologies of Gender in Videogame History
- Reference: https://gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney
- Category: #article

## Page Notes
## Highlights
- Huhtamo's own project proposes an “archaeology of gaming” consistent with contemporary scholarly approaches in media studies and media history, typically captured under the umbrella of “media archaeology”: the materialist and archaeological turns which privilege non-progressive history, analysis of failed and dead media, and strong attention to technological materiality and medium specificity (rather than a representational or screen-based focus). — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:35:43](https://hyp.is/OmdINpTTEe6rKKcvz5L3eg/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- Yet the common practice of “adding women on” to game history in a gesture of inclusiveness fails to critically inquire into the ways gender is an infrastructure that profoundly affects who has access to what kinds of historical possibilities at a specific moment in time and space. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:37:17](https://hyp.is/fpOVGpTSEe6VT4Nbmw4A6A/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: I deem the notion of gender as infrastructure as deeply important as a concept for thought
- Guins offers a call to arms more comparative than evolutionary, skimmed from the top of the finest work in media and technology studies: “Where are game studies' Analog Days; Of Bicycles, Bakelites and Bulbs; Between Human and Machine; More Work for Mother; Make Room for Television; Window Shopping; The Atlas of Emotions; and Aramis, or the Love of Technology?” — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:37:22](https://hyp.is/dW6x2pTTEe6BDnPCEerJCw/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: Need to look these up
- media archaeological techniques prove inadequate to account for the category of gender in videogame history — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:37:54](https://hyp.is/iI2QzpTTEe63BOOV3mWHzQ/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- While many of the most provocative and innovative materialist media theories attempt to productively short circuit the subject-object division by displaying how media are active agents in the world, these efforts often wind up simply rearranging actor-network deck chairs, envisioning histories and theories without corporeal or discursive bodies, histories or theories lost in their own love for the mechanism's indifference to the body (which is to say, what makes the virus interesting to media archaeology is that it chews up your hard drive regardless of your subject position). — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:39:56](https://hyp.is/0VoGDJTTEe63B_sNm2VO-Q/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: 💖
- Insofar as videogame history struggles to represent itself as much more than a chronology of consoles, games, and programmers, the field fails to critically inquire into the ways gender is an infrastructure that profoundly affects who has access to what kinds of historical possibilities at a specific moment in time and space [4]. Gender dynamics in relationship to technological practices must address how spatial politics, technological and educational access, and social formations set conditions for who might find themselves available to games as a medium to begin with [5]. Because game history is largely concerned with its chronology of objects, and because even Huhtamo's archaeological widening is primarily concerned with adding objects to find “roots” yet to be “excavated,” these methods do not have a broad or embedded sense of what else “might count” as part of such history. The question of rigorously exploring gender as a historical category within game studies deserves better than a merely additive or contextual move of “digging up” a history of women and games [6]. Thus, I depart significantly from other academic game historians, and admittedly operate contra to what one might imagine a feminist videogame history to look like. History is not in what we talk about, but in how we organize its meaning. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:41:49](https://hyp.is/FICUjJTUEe6KS4vm7nZnGg/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- Follow me, then. I will offer three scenes dropped out of time, three objects: a pedestal, a table, a love letter. They will each provide a path for encountering a question: what counts in game history? How do bodies come to count in game history? How do spaces come to count in game history? How do memories come to count in game history? Against each, I will parcel out a reading of Roberta Williams; their assemblage will carve out conditions of infrastructure and historical embeddedness that I could never twine together on a timeline. If this seems a strange tableau, consider: it may be their discontinuity that shapes a constellation new to the historical night. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:44:01](https://hyp.is/WPcEPpTUEe61X59xgOczfw/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: I love this approach to writting
- Videogame history does not know how to “make sense” of Roberta Williams except to single her out. Hers is a body deeply out of joint in a historical narrative that traditionally locates its origins in the male-dominated camaraderie formed across subculturally “masculine” practices of tabletop gaming, hacking and coding, and technical mastery. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:46:53](https://hyp.is/yhRakJTUEe64M7tXJwv7qQ/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- Roberta occupies a pedestal more often than a context, functioning as the gender-balancing notch on a game history timeline — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:47:18](https://hyp.is/2N0M8pTUEe6Ut7ctT1Fudw/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- Sierra On-Line was one of the longest standing, consistently successful home computer game software companies of the 1980s and 1990s, and that Williams herself was the first female game designer producing solely for the microcomputer market [9]. She was the lead designer of the first adventure games with both monochrome and color graphics (Mystery House and Wizard and the Princess, respectively, both 1980), the largest adventure game ever made during the era (Time Zone, 1982, on six double-sided 5.25” disks), the first “adventurization” of a major motion picture (The Dark Crystal, 1983), the first adventure game with environmental “2.5-D” depth in which you could walk around objects (King's Quest, 1984), the first major graphical computer game with a recognizably human female avatar [10] (King's Quest IV, 1988), and the first game to use live action actors (Phantasmagoria, 1995). — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:48:34](https://hyp.is/-teYwpTUEe6rMDeK0xjkfg/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: 💪🏻
- In other words, there has always been more girls to game history than Roberta Williams -- we just have not always known where to find them. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:50:00](https://hyp.is/OQZj2pTVEe6agr9nh0SuTA/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- Some of her later works, we know, were designed on the backs of unrolled wrapping paper, or handwritten on legal pads. The table would have been the most obvious surface in the Williams' home large enough to map on, and in most suburban tract houses, especially those of the California ranch style, layouts were such that kitchens gave the optimal domestic observation -- a mother could “work” in a kitchen and still observe the play of her children in another “room” of the home. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:51:53](https://hyp.is/cReI0JTVEe6ZTQ9ad0QzLg/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: I love the focus on materiality here.
- The imagination of Mystery House rests in neither the treasure nor the murders, but in what extends the space of the home; how everyday objects like butter knives and pitchers of water allow one to traverse the flesh of walls. While most games, up to that historical moment, posited their ludic experiences in visions of outer space, fields of physical play, or fantasy caves and dungeons, Mystery House does not share the genealogical investments in space and military research, tabletop gaming, and science fiction enthusiasm that concretized male affinities, affects, and practices around gamemaking. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:54:32](https://hyp.is/2yyzWJTVEe6KTVOXRDBuPQ/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- Notions of designing “entertainment” for Roberta Williams were implicitly co-relational to a domestic “labor” of cooking, cleaning, and family maintenance. Furthermore, we cannot imagine such space as a “fixed” context into which fall “stable” technologies and “known” bodies. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:55:49](https://hyp.is/CUMMYJTWEe66-UPEUOS5nA/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public

- ones of coding “wizardry” or the rapture of the hack — [Updated on 2023-12-07 08:57:33](https://hyp.is/Rxwv7pTWEe66-5tfqtShUQ/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public
    - Annotation: Were does this notion actually come from?
- Juul affirms that gameplay has long been more diverse than we can easily account for, yet the writing of game history as remembered also plays a role beyond Juul's scope. Is the weird historical trick here that what we have written thus far are not histories of gaming but a history of gamers -- and that is why so much gets left out? The curious lives of Roberta Williams, of Elizabeth Hood, of the women who make confessions of their ludic pasts to me at conferences, suggest that we may need to flip the sentence: what does it take for a life to fit a game? Within game history, the only people we have made historically visible are those we have organized ourselves to see, those who have made the game a certain type of culture. But there have been others. In the case of my colleague in Denmark, she forgot. In the case of that student, she went back to books. In the case of Roberta Williams, she gave up game design in 1998 and has refused interviews for nearly a decade, always, always riffing to the same refrain: “I don't do Sierra anymore.” In the case of myself, I stand around, trying to feel out a history not of gamers past, but of bodies that mostly remain un-subject to our history. — [Updated on 2023-12-07 09:02:52](https://hyp.is/Ba8ARJTXEe683DP6zCPXEQ/gamestudies.org/1302/articles/nooney) — Group: #Public



