---
created: 2023-11-23T08:44
updated: 2023-11-23T14:15
---
- Coding for digital graphics involves a multimodal design approach. The code written, and the output generated by that code does not correlate aesthetically. The brief moment of translation, from one system of signifiers into another, happens already in the programmer or designer before the computational act itself. There is a double rhetoric at play, one for the code, one for the visuality, as well as an abstraction from a desired output into machinic language.

## Questions
To what extent are the technological foundations of video games and their visuality entangled? Can they be treated as separate domains, or do they have to be read as paratexts to each other? Are they on a semiological continuum, or is there a shift of expression at the moment of transformation from code to image? Can a games code be read meaningful towards the image that it emanates?

- How do game developers use programming to create the visual design of digital games, and what are the implications of this approach for the relationship between technology and aesthetics in game design?
- How does the interplay between the technological limits of digital game development and the reception of the image influence the generation of meaning for players, and what are the implications of this interplay for game design?
- In what ways do game designers and developers encode meaning and rhetoric into the images of digital games, and how do these choices affect players' emotions and perceptions?
- How has the concept of "visuality" in digital games evolved, and what are the specific characteristics that differentiate it from other forms of visual media?
- What role does ergodicity play in shaping the visuality of digital games, and how does it affect players' engagement with the game's images and narratives?
- How has the technological evolution of digital game development tools and hardware influenced the visual design and material aspects of digital games, and how have these changes impacted the semiotics of game imagery?
- What are the techno-historic limits that early digital game design faced, and how did these limits shape the formal and semiotic aspects of the visuality of early digital games?
- How can critical code analysis be applied to better understand the relationship between the technological foundation of digital games and the visible image, and what insights can this approach provide into the development of game visuals?

## Schedule
##### Work Package 0 – 2023-2024
WP0 is reserved for getting a good overview, setting the focus, working on the expose, attaining the necessary ECTS points needed for the PhD. Part of working on the expose are case studies to inquire focus-related and methodological questions. The case studies are listed under 2.3.

##### Work Package 1 – 1. half 2024
WP1 concentrates on the discipline of digital humanities as well as the building, maintaining, and analysing of an image corpus regarding the visuality of digital games. The corpus was a case study that is outlined in 2.3.1. 

- Questions: What kind of knowledge can an image corpus on digital games generate? What kind of knowledge is lost in the process (see ergodicity)? What are the infrastructural necessities to enable distant and close readings of the image corpus?
- Methods: Image corpus analysis
- Publishing medium: Digital humanities journal, TBD
- Schedule
	- 1 - 2 months: Building corpus
	- 3 - 4 months: Analysing through distant and close reading methods
	- 1 - 2 months: Write-up findings, publish and rewrite

Part of this work package is the start of a digital edition, that enables the exploration of the image corpus, as well as other data relevant to my dissertation. This edition could stand on its own, or be structured to fit a specific publication. 

##### Work Package 2 – 2. half 2024
WP2 shifts to the HGP-method as well as design rhetoric, see 4.3.3. I will define three case studies in which I will analyse the visuality of one digital game, or a group of games, within their historical contexts. The goal is to identify flows and novelties, pop-cultural references and visual discourse regarding the visuality and how those relate to Switzerland as a historic unity.

- Questions: What is the specific visuality of digital games made in Switzerland? What kind of influences did it take up, propagate, and what kind of elements did it add to the discourse?
- Methods: Design rhetoric, HGP-method
- Publishing medium: Video game studies journal, Design rhetoric journal, TBD
- Schedule
	- 1 month: Defining case studies
	- 3 - 4 months: One month per case study, analysing the digital game(s) through the mentioned method and the images collected in WP1
	- 1 - 2 months: Write-up findings, publish and rewrite

##### Work Package 3 – 1. half 2025
WP3 focuses on a corpus which will take time to create, that is, the archive holding the source code of the games. The collection of, or search for, digital games source code will start as early as possible. In most cases, this material will be found through the original developers, if the source code has been preserved at all. Alternative ways to obtain source code will be considered as well. For example, decompressing the games when they were written in Basic, which does not compile. The source code archive will be worked through digital humanities distant reading approaches, such as corpus analysis, as well as close reading attempts and critical code analysis.

- Questions: How can we work academically with digital games' source code? How does source code behave as corpus and archival material? What kind of text is source code, and how can digital humanities distant reading approach handle it?
- Methods: Critical code analysis
- Publishing medium: Digital humanities journal, TBD
- Schedule:
	- 2 months: Building of source code archive
	- 2 - 3 months: Distant and close reading analysis of source code
	- 1 - 2 months: Write-up findings, publish and rewrite

##### Work Package 4 – 2. half 2025
WP4 combines work done in the previous work packages and attempts to unify several methodological approaches (distant reading, close reading, design rhetoric, critical code analysis). The aim of this work package is to inquire the original hypothesis and questions regarding the invisible rift between the research on the image of the digital game and its material base, as well as my assumption that there is an unacknowledged interplay between the techno-historic limits of digital game development and the reception of the image. I will define three case studies of digital games of which I have material in my image corpus and source code archive, and apply said method in combination to methodological results from former work packages. To this end, findings from WP2 and WP3 will be combined and extended. 

- Questions: To what extent are the technological foundations of video games and their visuality entangled? Can they be treated as separate domains, or do they have to be read as paratexts to each other? Are they on a semiological continuum, or is there a shift of expression at the moment of transformation from code to image? Can a games code be read meaningful towards the image that it emanates?
- Methods: Critical code analysis, Design rhetoric, HGP-method
- Publishing medium: Design rhetoric journal, Video game studies journal, TBD
- Schedule:
	- 1 month: Defining case studies
	- 3 - 4 months: One month per case study, analysing the digital game(s) through outlined approach
	- 1 - 2 months: Write-up findings, publish and rewrite

##### Work Package 5 – 2026-2027
WP5 focuses on wrapping up the publishing process of the four papers and writing the synopses needed for the dissertation.